(Factortame Brasserie du Pecheur):

Germany; Beer purity law, France no such law, Germany said French company can't market in Germany, firm had lots of damage, claimed reparations from Germany
-> German parliament had adopted law, conscious decision by democratically elected parliament, argues for no liability, ECJ says they have to pay reparations, formula as francovich, is basis here

(Francovich principle):

secondary law
to late/not implemented
unconditional
sufficiently precise
-> has direct effect and the state needs to pay reparations
claimants must prove that the directive conferred specific rights on them, identifiable in its wording, and that there is a causal link between the state's failure to implement the directive and the loss suffered

(Francowich):

Worked for an Italian company, salary outstanding, company files for bankruptcy, salary not paid. 
Should have established a fund according to EU community directive, Italy has failed to implement directive properly, so he argues that Italy owes him money
BUT; directive - needs to be adapted first, no direct effect
Question; Can a member state that violates community law and an individual suffers damage be held liable?
Francovich principle; States can be hold liable by individuals 
preliminary ruling

Amsterdam treaty:

1997, part of 3rd pillar into first,

Annulment of act:

1. court of first instance, now general court, first decision/judgement
2. Court of Justice, appeal decision, preliminary ruling also here but without appeal 
Kadi is appeal decision

Annulment procedure:

Art. 173 Rome 
Who? 
- Council of Ministers
- Commission
- Member state
- Natural people (if direct and individual concern)
- Legal people (if direct and individual concern)

What?
Acts of council and commission of ministers (except recommendations)

Baumbast 2002:

German, living in UK, self-employed, business fails, goes to China, Columbian wife, child both nationalities, has sickness insurance in Germany, goes to Germany for treatments, family stays in UK, applies for residence permit to visit family, rejected
Cannot rely on free movement of workers because no longer works in UK
Baumbast does not have sickness insurance in UK, but money. Would be disproportionate to refuse him right to reside in UK just because emergencies are not covered
-> Fifth fundamental freedom is still conditional on funds and sickness insurance, but here principle of proportionality applies

Baumbast formula:

Sufficient financial resources 
Long-term employment (past or present) 
Permanent residence in UK (in person or dependants) 
no burden to public finances 
Comprehensive health insurance

Bosman [1995]:

Leading case for free movement of workers
was a Belgian who wanted to join a club in France, his old club wanted to much money from the new one for a transfer, Liège refused him, revoked him of first league status, contact between Liège and Bosman ended, salary reduce, contact with Dunkerque, would have had to pay a fee to buy him, others weren't sure he'd pay so let the contract laps, couldn't play, same with other clubs
Normal; 3+2 rule, 3 foreigners + 2 foreigners that have played in that country for more than 5 years
Prior to this case, UEFA was run parallel to regular law 
Normally not in front of regular court, Bosman had to fight to get it to ECJ already

Bosman legal basis:

Art. 48 - free movement of goods, court needed to check if Bosman as individual can invoke that right 
Par. 73 - sports only subject if economic activity, appl. of Art. 48 - needed is employment status
Par. 76 - Sport is not separate, so fundamental freedom rights apply
Is there a restriction to free movement?
- fee in domestic and international cases, no discrimination
Problem of market access?
Par. 92 - Obstacle to freedom of movement, restriction even though there is no discrimination
Keck does not apply
3+2 clause is direct discrimination, is also cultural not economic
-> After, players were free to move to another club and can demand market value in terms of salary, contract money, not transfer fee

Cassis de Dijon (1979):

This was produced in France and contained between 15-20 per cent alcohol by volume (ABV). Germany, however, had a law specifying that products sold as fruit liqueurs be over 25 per cent ABV
clearly MEE, justification valid if they are necessary to certify mandatory requirements, rule of reason
2. Mutual recognition of regulation, Germans have to accept French regulations, can start race to bottom for no regulations but court said yes, except for cases of justification based on mandatory requirements
Expanded to other fields, drivers licenses etc. If its good enough for one state, it has to be good enough for another
Lots of secondary judgements, don't directly referred to normally

Costa v ENEL (1964):

Costa (individual) holds shares, refused to pay electricity bill because he didn't agree with what happened in the industry, relied on EEC treaty
Enel was nationalised, against treaty -> Van Gend en Loos violated
Question; relationship between EU law and national law in a direct conflict 
International perspective; you cannot argue on basis of domestic law for infringements of international law 
Domestic perspective; Oftentimes stipulates that Constitution (CH; Minarettverbot)
regulations -> Directly applicable
Directives -> more general, need for national measure

Costa v ENEL:

The supremacy of EU law, Principle of Primacy of Community law
national law was nationalisation, international law prohibits it 
Community law has to take precedence, otherwise community would be deprived of its character, would call the legal basis of community under question
Central message; there is a new legal order, the center of which is the individual with their rights rather than the member states
constitutional principle primarcy

Council of Europe:

an international organisation, comprising 47 member states (EU states, Turkey, Russia etc.) with the mission to safeguard human rights in Europe and as such author or the European Convention of Human Rights (ECHR) and the corresponding court. (ECtHR)

Dassonville (1974):

Parallel importing of Scotch Whiskey, normally from UK direct to Belgium (only possible with exclusive license only monopolist has), they went over France and then Belgium, no doubt over origin of product
Competitors had exclusive dealing arrangements with UK exporters, and so they had acquired the whisky from France. However, in France, it was impossible to obtain a certificate because French law did not require certificates.
Dassonville claims that Belgian restriction is Quantitative restriction (Measure having equivalent effect, MME)

Draft constitution:

to simplify and make more transparent, Veto Netherlands and France

Dual Burden Theory:

regulations / rules on goods & services may not be harmonized amongst MS and can require an individual to comply with regulations in a foreign MS that differ from the ones in his domestic MS (e.g. a German bar exam is not valid in Italy)

European Council:

comprises heads of state of all MS plus the presidents of the European Council and the European Commission, submits advisory opinions to to the European Commission.

European Court of Justice (ECJ):

ensures uniform interpretation / application of European law and has the power to settle disputes between Member States (MS) / institutions / businesses a​nd ​ individuals.

European Parliament (EP):

is the directly elected parliament of the EU and as such responsible for deciding on legislation and upholding EU treaties.

Executive:

European Commission (suggest legislature, one member per state) & European Council (Head of Governments)

Free movement (Bosman Ex.):

Art. 45, Art. 49 establishment, Art. 56 services (providing and receiving)
Natural person; Workers & Self employed & Services
Legal person; self employed or company, go under freedom of establishment

Fundamental freedoms:

in EU context usually refers to the four freedoms, laid out in the TFEU, namely free movements of goods / persons / services / capital implying also freedom of establishment

Gebhard (1995), first case for freedom of establishment:

Lawyer, goes to Italy to work, falls under freedom of establishment, has qualifications from Germany but not Italy, so they don't want him to call himself "avvocatti" because he did not pass the Italian Bar. 
Freedom of services here subordinate to Freedom of Establishment 
A person can have more than one establishment, so in Germany and Italy
-> He is bound by German and Italian rules
Para. 36; You must comply with host state regulations 
4 requirements must be fulfilled for such a measure and restriction to be lawful; 
- applied in a non-discriminatory manner
- public interest
- suitable for attaining pursued objective
- necessary

Gebhard formula:

public interest
suitable for attainment
not beyond what is necessary
non-discriminatory

Human Rights (EU, ECHR):

European community was initially about economics, fundamental freedoms as heart of community, implemented by member states, preliminary ruling procedure
Fundamental rights/human rights belonged to sphere of state, not featured prominently in the EU because no economic dimension
Problem; What if a member state implements law of community which is in conflict with fundamental right?
Question of primarcy -> Law of Eu precedence over national law (costa Enel)
EU -> Sphere that bleeds into member states, authority in not bound to human rights (avoided since WW2)

Inernationale Handelsgesellschaft mbH vs. Einfuhr- und Vorratsstelle für Getreide und Fuhrmittel:

Fundamental rights in the EU
We will need to enquire whether there is something similar like fundamental rights in the treaty, otherwise vacuum
trader has to submit deposit that can be lost according to EU legislation but not according to German constitution 
par. 3; EU law takes precedence over national law because that's the nature of community law, risk of vacuum as there was no EU law for that 
Catalogue of fundamental rights binds member states when they implement EU law and which individuals can rely on implemented
Empowerment of ECJ and individual 
Nice summit -> Charter of fundamental rights 
2009 Lisbon treaty; Member states agree to make charter binding, same legal position as treaties
ECHR legally binding for EU, European court of human rights in Strassbourg gained jurisdiction over EU -> Above EJC
The case is important because it addresses what appears to be one of the most difficult challenges facing the acceptance of the supremacy of European law within the German legal order, that is, the possibility of conflict between a European law obligation and a fundamental right protected by the German Constitution. it was virtually impossible that the national courts would accept European law supremacy without a guarantee of human rights protection. In this light, the significance of Internationale Handelsgesellschaft was that the European Court of Justice itself took on a role protecting the fundamental rights of individuals in the European legal order

Infringement procedure:

legal procedure set in motion against a member state if it does not comply with EU legislation, by Member state or commission, can adopt fine

Judiciary:

European Court of Justice

Kadi Question:

What was the legal basis to adopt this into the first pillar? sanctions against private person no clause (only states)
Can courts in UN member states review the legality of resolutions in light of national/community law? Is it possible for ECJ to review the legality of SC resolutions in light of the fundamental rights of the EU?
International or domestic law primacy?
Ius cogens, can't be violated, peremptory norm, like don't do genocide 
Found no violation of jus cogens
second instance; ECJ
trick; focusses on community regulation, not international measure from SC whose measures can't be reviewed apart from jus cogens, so they can fully review in light of all principles and not just jus cogens, see a clear violation of fundamental rights of the EU, but only review the domestic EU implementation, not the decision of the SC
EU legislation can be reviewed, not SC decision 
EU does not give the opportunity for sanctions against individuals

Kadi:

citizen of Saudi Arabia, funds in EU were frozen because Al Qaeda suspect 
Origin of suspect is security council resolution from 1999, ordering EU states to freeze funds of suspects 
person is included if member state proposes it
sanction committee oversees implementation of "smart sanctions" against specific individuals 
resolution must be implemented in EU states
second pillar, so unanimity 
establishes restriction on free movement of capital, also needs to be implemented in first pillar 
Kadi is added to list -> no money = no food and defence
-> exception for money to survive and lawyers
Very difficult to get off list
Mr. Kadi goes to court, ECJ, attacks first pillar (where ECJ has jurisdiction, not like second), violates fundamental right to property, fair process (wasn't able to defend himself), therefore seeks annulment of act

Keck:

A French competition law prohibited retail of products for prices below that which they had been purchased wholesale. The aim of this law was to prevent retailers engaging in 'cut-throat competition' by dumping excess produce onto the market, and forcing competitors out of business. Keck and Mithouard were charged with having sold Picon liqueur and Sati Rouge coffee below the purchase price. They argued that the law would discourage imports because importers are often new entrants to the market, and while trying to acquire market share and brand recognition they may wish to cut prices.
As long as they apply to all traders they must affect them in the same way in law and in fact, if measure is not discriminatory, Dassonville does not apply 
never been applied to anything else than goods
the purpose was not to regulate trade. If a rule applies to all traders in the same manner, and affects them in the same way in law and in fact, it is lawful if it is merely a selling arrangement. This was the case for the French anti-dumping rules.

Legislative:

European Parliament (1.)& Council of Ministers (ministers of member states meet, according to topic - agricultural ministers etc) (3.)

Les Verts 1986 issue:

Situation is not addressed by Art 173 as legal person brings claim against an act of PARLIAMENT, not mentioned as it had weaker role, was not designed to take decisions (now distribution of money to parties), ECJ did not reject jurisdiction, take broad understanding of act, stones towards EU becoming something bigger

Les verts EU parliament argument:

Doubt if Les verts is legal person, rejected by ECJ

Maastricht Treaty 1992:

establishing 3 pillars
1. Rome Treaty, common market
2. Common foreign and security policy
3. Justice and home affairs
Because; the first pillars decision making was by qualified majority, 2&3 every state has veto
Union Citizenship

Maria Martinez Sala vs. Freistaat Bayern:

Came to Germany from Spain to work, applied for child allowance
did not have a formal residence permit, which is only the paper saying that she has it, she has the right to stay, which is an additional criteria so she said she is discriminated
Germany; Not Personal/substantive scope, Court said it is 
Art. 59; Union citizenship
Art. 60; Has right to be in Germany 
Art. 61; Lawful residence, union citizenship -> within scope of ration personae (you are employed), has personal and substantive scope
Can't tell if she is covered because not sure if she was a worker, employed person would also include self-employment
Now, question; What does it mean that she has EU citizenship? Covered by non-discrimination?Yes, you don't need to be employed for that!
So she is entitled to benefits
requirement for permit unlawful 
Biggest step towards widen scope of treaty, before we thought you can refuse someone residency if they don't work or if you don't have money and a health insurance 
-> Creation of "New firth freedom"

MME:

- measure that is capable, actually or potentially, of having equivalent effect, you don't have to prove that there is an actual effect -> very broad scope
Consequence of Van Gend en Loos (direct effect) and Costa ENEL (primary)

Natural person:

Workers, self-employed, services (seek or receive)
self-employed and companies are freedom of establishment

Nice treaty:

2001, preparation for enlargement, adopt decision making procedure, balance voting

preliminary procedure:

Act by legislative bodies, passed to member states, national authorities implement, citizens go to domestic court, court can send question to ECJ and request preliminary ruling and ask how it shall be interpreted, ECJ writes down ruling and hands it to domestic court, preliminary ruling is binding, request is not mandatory for lower courts, but for Supreme courts

Principles underlying free movement of persons, goods, capital, labour:

No direct discrimination (national measure ties with nationality, Ex. different taxes)
no indirect discrimination (saying resident and not resident to discriminate)
no obstacles to market access (ban ads for foreign products)

Progressive/modern Treaties:

Concluded among member states, concern individual, eg. Human rights (> can individuals claim rights based on that treaty against international act?), have direct effect, rarely direct applicable, must be implemented into domestic law first

Result of Les verts:

European Parliament did not have power to regulate elections of EU Parliament, is a matter of national regulation

Rome Treaty:

1957- part of the movement towards economic unity in Europe; created the European Economic Community (EEC), aim of single market, EU parliament first elected 1979, preventing another war

Säger formula:

public interest
not allowed in another country with a similar context
not beyond what is necessary
non discriminatory

Säger:

Provides services to renew patents (just need to send a note in time) in Germany, high regulations who can offer this in Germany, nearly no in UK, UK services expand, Säger sues because he's loosing market
But no establishment, only free movement of service!
Only about this service, not risky service
-> A licence per se is a restriction

Secondary legislation citizenship:

possible for citizens of member states to go abroad 
3 categeories; 
- pensioners
- playboys
- students
Conditions; 
- sufficient resources
- sickness insurance

Sejdic & Finci:

VOM COUNCIL OF EUROPE; EUROPEAN CONVENTION ON HUMAN RIGHTS, sonst sind es fundamental rights in the EU
Roma/Jew want to run for office but can't as they are not affiliated wit one of the 3 constitutional peoples (Serbs, Bosniacs, croats), which is prerequisite to run 
1995 Dayton agreement has constitution of Bosnia & herzegovina, represents these 3 
Sejdic & Finci claim this violates ECHR
Art. 14; You can only claim non-discrimination if you claim another violation at the same time (discriminated in exercise of freedom of press etc)
Right to fair and free elections only for parliament, as executive is often elected by parliament
If a state ratified protocol 12, then members can claim a violation of art. 14 regardless if another right was touched
-> First case of this
System with regards to parliament violates ECHR and is not justifiable 
-> First time ECHR has found that constitutional provision violate convention
ECHR ist vom council of Europe, ganz was anderes als davor!

Service/establishment difference:

Freedom to provide services = temporary in nature 
Freedom of establishment = continuous provision of services, for specific kind of service you need to apply to local law

Test Achats:

First case where Court relies on the Charter of Fundamental rights 
Gener equality directive by European Community
Allows members to distinguish on the base of sex for insurance premiums based on proof 
Para 26; no time limit, makes it violation of charter of fundamental rights 
The ECHR has almost nothing to do with EU, just guideline for EU fundamental rights

Traditional International Treaties:

only create obligations among member states

Treaty of Lisbon:

2007, collapsed pillar structure, European community abolished, but still the same differences for voting (Articles changed here)
implemented right to leave the Union
Established Charter of Fundamental rights

Union Citizenship:

Established with Treaty of Maastricht, citizens of member states automatically become union citizens, increases identification with EU, considered separately from internal market

Van Gend en Loos (1963):

The case arose from the reclassification of a chemical, by the Benelux countries, into a customs category entailing higher customs charges.
Import duty infringes Art. 12, cannot raise import fees (=standstill clause), preliminary question, Dutch court refers to ECJ
Question; Is the EEC a traditional treaty or a progressive treaty (stipulating directly applicable rights)
New bilateral treaties with the EU there is a clause saying "this treaty shall not have direct effect" because of this case

Van Gend en Loos court:

(fact that EEC mentions people is not a good argument, UN charter same and not directly applicable)
"EU is a new legal order, national states have given up national legislation, so EU law is automatically part of national legislation", so you can rely on it directly in court?
in order to have direct effects, articles must only be clear and unconditional
If no direct effects, the EU would be ineffective, the preliminary ruling would not make sense
Taking the treaty away from states and giving it to people -> Transformation of Treaty to Constitution, supranational
Constitutional principle direct effect

Van Gend en Loos problem:

higher Duty towards company, but Art. 12 Stand still clause
Netherlands are monist legal order, UK for example is dualist (int. law has first to be incorporated and transposed into national law). Is ratification incorporation? General no, in dualist countries you need transposition (but dualist country can not transposed yet not bring as excuse)

What is les vert attacking?:

A decision by the bureau of the Eu parliament, challenging lawfulness of measures adopted at EU level, can the Parliament do this or is it member states? seek annulment